content/about.md, before:

+++
title = "About"
date = "2021-11-01"
+++

{{< badge >}}
*gasps* here we go
{{< /badge >}}

## Hi there

You are currently having a one-sided-textual-probably-monotonous-(tryhard?)-talk with me through this page.

*(Not one-sided anymore, thanks to [utterances](https://utteranc.es/), feel free to comment on this or any of my posts that you find interesting. **Dire** need of some activity here :P)*

My name is **Ashwani Kumar Kamal**. I'm a second year undergraduate student from the department of **Computer Science and Engineering** at **Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur**.  

I've worked in both frontend and  backend development. I've done courses on Image processing and Deep Learning.  

In my free time you'd probably find me watching some anime series or reading some book.

At the time of writing of this page, I am on [Elmon](https://sneaky-potato.ml/blog/my-dynamic-duo) running **Pop OS**.

<!-- {{< spotify type="album" id="5vqILcEeCT0N1DeJBsLrGE" width="100%" height="250" >}} -->

## Tech Stack

I love tinkering with stuff and code sometimes.

Thanks to [Wakatime](https://wakatime.com/) I can track down my coding stats right from my IDE (which is **VS Code** currently) and monitor my time accordingly. The following chart shows division of time spent in each language that I've worked in, since I started using Wakatime.

At the moment it displays as a dynamic SVG (yeah real time coding stats) provided by Wakatime itself but I'm making efforts to display it using [Chart.js](https://www.chartjs.org/)

(using a pre-existing [chart shortcode](https://github.com/jpanther/congo/blob/dev/layouts/shortcodes/chart.html) in this theme I'm using. More on Hugo shortcodes- [here](https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/))

{{< figure
    src="https://wakatime.com/share/@sneaky_potato/04837fa6-7e5d-460d-9af5-8bd725321913.svg"
    alt="Coding stats"
    >}}

My current OS is **Manjaro Linux**

Commit message:

Replace wakatime chart with general tech stack

content/about.md, after:

+++
title = "About"
date = "2021-11-01"
+++

{{< badge >}}
*gasps* here we go
{{< /badge >}}

## Hi there

You are currently having a one-sided-textual-probably-monotonous-(tryhard?)-talk with me through this page.

*(Not one-sided anymore, thanks to [utterances](https://utteranc.es/), feel free to comment on this or any of my posts that you find interesting. **Dire** need of some activity here :P)*

I'm a second year undergraduate student from the department of **Computer Science and Engineering** at **Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur**.  

In my free time you'd probably find me watching some anime series, reading some book or reading one of the blogs I follow.

If you're bored, let's have a chat. I'd absolutely enjoy your views (and would love to give you my views on your views), thoughts, experiences.

At the time of writing of this page, I am on [Elmon](https://sneaky-potato.ml/blog/my-dynamic-duo) running **Pop OS**. (Although the page has been updated many times)

<!-- {{< spotify type="album" id="5vqILcEeCT0N1DeJBsLrGE" width="100%" height="250" >}} -->

## Tech Stack

I love tinkering with stuff and code sometimes.

I like to think of my background bit like a pizza. The base is Mathematics, the sauce is Engineering and Computer Science, and the toppings, well, the toppings will depend on the project that I’m working on at the time.

I've worked in both frontend and  backend development. I've done courses on Image processing and Deep Learning. Also, recently started reading about software design patterns.

My current OS is **Manjaro Linux**

My GitHub [profile](https://github.com/sneaky-potato/) would be a more accurate representation of this section I guess.
